# Team-15-Net-Zero
Open-source platform for trusted product carbon labels data and environmental labeling education.
By Mihai Enescu, Mathew Beane, Hassia Gado Alzouma

Consumers and investors are increasingly looking for companies to show that they are aware of climate change and are transparent about their product’s environmental impact. Trustworthy data about a product’s greenhouse gas emissions or CO2e spent in its creation, transportation, use and end of life, as measured in grams or kilograms of carbon is scarce. Companies are struggling to come up with their own methodologies for calculating and labeling the carbon footprint of any given product and are looking for federal guidance.

The United States Environmental Protection Agency advised in their Environmental Labeling Issues, Policies, and Practices Worldwide (December 1998, EPA 742-R-98-009) report that one of the primary limitations in environmental labeling programs has been a lack of awareness on the part of consumers. “Increased consumer awareness about environmental issues and the existence and purpose of environmental labeling could significantly affect the success of carbon footprint labeling programs. If national and international news events, in combination with consumer education, increase awareness of environmental issues and labeling information is found to be credible and useful, retail consumer demand is likely to increase.”

Lack of reliable data sources about a product’s environmental impact stifles education, research, and innovation in this field. The retail consumer education content published by media and educational programs to increase awareness of a product’s environmental impact has been fear-based, causing feelings of hopelessness and anxiety. Although some companies are sharing data about their product’s environmental impact, a trusted, standardized, and centralized source of data that can support environmental labeling programs is missing.

By converging IBM’s and EYs technology, strategy, and business consulting capabilities a platform can be created where companies can share their product’s greenhouse gas emissions or CO2e spent in its creation, transportation, use and end of life. IBM DataStage could be used for product carbon label data integration, governance and analytics on a single data and AI platform. IBM Product Master could provide trusted product carbon label information management and collaborative master data management capabilities. Product Master could be used to aggregate information from company system willing to share data, enforce business processes to ensure data accuracy and consistency, and synchronize trusted information for consumption. EY’s Ripples program and Climate Change and Sustainability Services teams can help companies understand, evaluate, and label their products environmental impact in grams or kilograms of carbon. IBM’ education technology solutions combined with EY’s education advisory services could add to the platform an educational module designed for consumers, researchers, companies and government.

The IBM and EY Net Zero platform would provide a trusted source of product carbon labels created in partnership with companies willing to be transparent and share their data. Companies are increasingly creating carbon labels to educate consumers the environmental costs of their daily habits. The education module of the Net Zero would contain educational material based on the data collected on the platform. Research shows that educational messaging focused on carbon footprint solutions can negate feelings of hopelessness and inspire productive behavior. The data would be open sourced which would create new research and development opportunities. Providing trusted product carbon label data and solution based educational resources could convince government bodies such as the Environmental Protection Agency and Federal Trade Commission to develop programs to standardize carbon labels. The Net Zero platform could be used to showcase what the IBM’s and EY’s technology, strategy, and business consulting capabilities can do towards a cleaner, greener and a sustainable environment.
